so we just got done watching like the
vegans new video the real cost of meat
and one of the first questions that he
asks in his video is well he he says
that everybody hit everybody who is
vegan has walked through the grocery
store and looked at a package of meat
and wondered how can this be so cheap
this is scary
and the rest of the video doesn't really
answer this question why is the price of
meat so cheap it goes on to talk about a
lot of other issues that don't answer
the question so he goes off topic
quickly and becomes a parade of
miscellaneous and spurious vegan
complaints about American politics on
life on Earth yeah so it never gets back
to answer and I want to ask you more
about some of the specific things that
he talks about in this video but I
wanted to record a video with you about
this because at the end of it I was like
okay so why is me it's so cheap of
course I thought about it before I
remember having a conversation like this
with my dad one time and saying that
we're eaten we need to have more
subsidies for fruits and vegetables to
even out the cost so that people are
more inclined to buy fruits and
vegetables to buy
I mean rice itself is so cheap and so is
beans but people still aren't buying it
so I just wanted to make a video about
this topic in particular why is meat so
cheap and kind of answer that question
because Mike the vegans video didn't
accomplish this right now
so aside from expressing my complete
contempt for Mike the vegan I would
answer this firstly by answer the
question of why would I know my
university degree is political science
but and I always had interest in these
issues like Melissa I really started off
being interested in ecology and then
being interested in veganism for that
reason when I was living in Laos Laos is
a third-world post-war communist
dictatorship in Southeast Asia country
very much recovering from being bombed
and destroyed by the US Army the unique
set of political economic services when
I was in Laos I really applied the
knowledge I've gained in university and
asked and knew all these questions both
in contrasting animal agriculture
to vegetable and grain agriculture and
also in contrasting fruit agriculture to
opium that was the alternative so that's
why I didn't when Melissa asked me this
just a couple minutes ago off the top of
my head I listened up all of these
factors for why farming something like
apples or strawberries is actually more
expensive seemingly on a per unit basis
for and settle again for you know the
uninitiated
it just seems unjust that apples are so
expensive or strawberries are so
expensive
well meat is so cheap and then when you
start to go through what what the
factors are did by bid it starts to make
sense
mm-hmm yeah likewise as you say so like
in Laos I was dealing with a couple of
different sources of Mythology sort of
intentional disinformation about
agriculture and then dealing with a
certain number of inconvenient truths
that related both to meet in Laos it was
mostly beef we're looking at weren't
real looking at chicken or pork um and
it has bearing on opium and opium
eradication policy right so people would
often present so sorry I just a positive
one second you remember there was a hit
movie called and Inconvenient Truth yeah
we as vegans have to deal with some
inconvenience right leather production
is incredibly profitable in many cases
in many countries the profitability of
leather
supports the less profitable or
sometimes loss making beef and veal
industry right you can also be in a
country where it's dairy production at
something like butter production is more
profitable that's supporting the price
of producing beef and beef what have you
you know different stages of the process
can be more profitable than supporting
others yeah I just wanted to say like
that you know we I think one time we
watched a short documentary about how
government buys and this is mentioned in
this video yeah the government will by
excess dairy you know access Terry
Brooks so you're supporting the price
yeah it must be so cheap to produce milk
right there's this oversupply it the
when the place gets too low the
government intervenes try to maintain
the price of it at a certain anyway
right like so they were they were
they were trying to encourage me right
really raising me well let's just let's
just talk about who they is right this
is this is why I was so intimate about
this in Laos and this is a real and
Commedia truth for me as a vegan for me
as someone who cares about ecology there
inconvenient truths I have to face up to
also United Nations agencies and
international charities more encouraging
people in a third world country to stop
farming rice stop farming I know nuts or
beans or garlic garlic was another local
crop and to instead go into producing
beef right animal agriculture so of
course I'm horrified and I want to
believe this is an economic disaster I
want to believe it's not profitable I
want to believe it's bad for these
people and I'm meeting with and talking
to face-to-face government officials and
in my last period there it especially
was government officials who were
agricultural engineers and involved in
agriculture for poverty alleviation but
I are you know hide yourself
were you gonna deal with are you gonna
deal with real facts and the
inconvenient truth was by god access to
when I looked at the math the same math
United Nations growing in the same math
other charitable agencies like USAID
United States aid agency no no it's just
it's an international charity run by
this government
USA eat another EU cherries rolling in
and guess what these government
officials were not lying to me when they
said that you know raising cattle
raising beef was the number one catalyst
for farmers escaping poverty that is a
ladder I would have liked that they
based that rice farmers locked in
poverty and that when they were given
assistance to get into beef agriculture
they would suddenly be able to afford
things like motorcycles and
what-have-you and education for their
children health care and everything else
the economic reality was for me an
inconvenient truth right right and I I
agree with that completely and that's I
feel like that was how Mike the vegan
was trying to convince people and I
agree that like as a vegan I want to
believe that it is more expensive than
then the price day yeah and when he
opens my huge admission right he opens
with the admission that if you do the
math in the United States of America
a little bit there India's America the
government subsidies various forms of
state intervention maybe lower the price
of meat products by 2 percent up to 5
percent a range of 2 percent to 5
percent that is a huge own-goal that's a
huge concession and he then spends the
rest of the video kind of invisible or
like just artist
I don't know imaginary statistics make
you feel like the cost is really higher
than it is you know he goes on to talk
about all the you know as you said all
the horrible things about animal
agriculture like the cost of
psychological assistance like this isn't
really the cost this isn't talking about
why meat is so cheap and I think this is
really important to face up to as vegans
that is more expensive in some ways to
be vegan than it is to not be vegan and
obviously it is cheaper to buy and yeah
well I meet from from the store that it
is to buy vegetables and fruits I only
said this stuff about Laos and
production of median Laos as really
explaining why would my opinion be well
informed about this I already had an
interest in it when I was in Canada and
then I went to this third world country
where I really did an enormous amount of
reading on how farming worked and didn't
work there and what government policy
was and then with the policy of
international aid agency was United
Nations agencies and other actors in the
game and I wasn't just interested in
meat but meat was a huge flush when
another crop was much debated with
rubber rubber agriculture then another
one was as mentioned opium you know so
this familiarized me with a lot of the
factors I just talked about with you
without reference to that Millia so a
lot of people would again this is about
convenient half-truths versus an
inconvenient whole truth a lot of people
would present these statistics saying oh
look it's so much more profitable to
farm apples it's so much more profitable
to farm strawberries than it is to farm
opium so all we need to do is get out
there and educate farmers in Laos and
they're all going to switch to being
apples and strawberries right so we just
talked about this at the con
to me OPM doesn't need a refrigerator
OPM doesn't even need a truck opium in
its raw form it's like it's like a
rubber ball and they produce this almost
indestructible rubbery substance that's
extracted from the opium plants and you
can load it on the back of a donkey
carriage and you know a donkey can pull
a wooden cart and that's it no if you do
that with strawberries those
strawberries are not going to reach
market in a form that anyone wants to
buy right right no that's so obvious I
mean that was one of the things that we
talked about was now like that animal
agriculture it isn't it isn't ruled or
governed by schedule it isn't governed
by like what the schedule of seasons you
can you can schedule as you said to have
more turkeys slaughtered around
Thanksgiving or around Christmas and and
as you said like in where where oranges
are grown they're basically worthless
but then like right yeah anyway in
medieval or ancient times all farmers
were slaves to the season but the switch
to modern factory farming we want to say
modern intensive meat agriculture it has
broken the relationship between farmers
and the schedule the seasons so one of
the excited appointed melissa's look
factor number one producing corn one
time of sweet corn here for human
consumption is categorically different
from producing what Americans call cow
corn for towel consumption for animal
consumption food that is at a grade or
quality or even level of safety and
hygiene for human beings to eat where
human beings are going to pick it up in
the shop and look at it it's color it's
condition and they're gonna pay money
for it and they've gotta compared to
competition - okay so here's some sweet
corn imported from here and assume and
they're gonna pick which one's best you
have to produce it at a very very high
grade and what animals are fed
especially in a factory farm system
especially modern intensive
my culture they are fed often the
garbage of other crops you know it can
be the chaff separated from the inedible
parts of grains
you know the garbage produces a
byproduct of basically any other form of
plant agriculture and the the
nutritional deficits in that feed
whatever it may be I mean where I was in
Southeast Asia again you could literally
could be interment ear of sweet corn it
could be that the sweet corn feeds a
human and the ear feeds a pig you know
that you take off the the rapping or the
stalks that was also a famous thing he
used to chop up the stalks of all the
animals oh sorry it would chop up the
stalks all the plants and feed them to
pigs and so on um this kind of waste
part you know those lemurs they're not
nutritionally complete for pigs or cows
or chickens but the modern feed business
is precisely mixing this in with
basically a vitamin pill were you
providing you with a sack of supplement
you can google this right G 12 is right
at it we're not even inject it into
animals because it's not me well right
yeah but the cheap way you just have a
trough and in the feed trough they put
in a few scoops of this nutritional I
didn't stir it in and then the animals
take it from there so you know the the
value of the feed being given to the
animals is as close to zero as science
and the free market in conspire to make
it the the the distribution so that
that's factor one factor to look if you
farm strawberries within a given
continent they're only going to be a few
places where the climatic conditions are
correct for farming strawberries right
and then let's say I'm just simplifying
let's say once a year the strawberries
come in season so you have a standard
paradox of Plenty here so at one place
in one time strawberries are worthless
so in your little community where the
strawberries are produced you have a
surplus of strawberries the local price
plummets the value of them in that area
plummets and then you have to ship them
further and further away to get a decent
price so you know if it cost money and
yes my refrigerator right but shipping
something like strawberries especially
the amount of time the number of days
that can pass
the conditions for shipping the quality
of the road the quality of the truck the
quality of road it is it's it's very
very demanding right yeah and the but
the points to the geographic
distribution is extreme I mean it's it's
almost by definition with something like
fruit and vegetable culture it's gonna
be the opposite of what you want you
know where do we grow wheat in Canada
well we grow it in Manitoba where do
people eat bread in Canada they didn't
Toronto in Montreal the distances are
unfathomable now by car so again within
the United States where do you produce
oranges Florida well with the in Florida
especially the minute oranges are in
season when the crop comes in oranges
are worthless you have to ship them to
Seattle and New York and places with her
they're worth money
so this is a stand this is an almost
universal feature of vegetable and fruit
agriculture right but under the
conditions of modern factory farming
meat agriculture doesn't operate this
way if you look at a map I've done this
many times including on my old blog
before I had a youtube channel so the
reason this came up in the past was that
meat eaters would say that they are
ethical because they buy locally farmed
locally slaughtered meat and I would
challenge them and say go to Google Maps
or Google around find a map of
slaughterhouses in your country or your
state or your province where as you live
and what you find is there everywhere
all all meat eaters are eating locally
slaughtered meat all the time because
the distribution of this you can set up
a factory enclosure with this like for
example with chickens you mean yet
everyone watching this video has seen
this you're talking about a metal shed
it doesn't rely on any kite that doesn't
rely on the local climate and it's not
like growing strawberries needs to be in
just the right conditions or growing
coffee to grow really excellent coffee
the altitude the temperature the amount
of rain is all very specific you can
have a shed full of chickens eating
worthless refuse from other forms of
Agriculture with nutritional benefits
stirred into it a logo you can set that
up anywhere and everywhere and that's
exactly what modern animal
so the the production of the chickens in
the first place is distributed
everywhere there are a little bit of
constraints of pigs and cows but not
much
you just need them to be far enough away
that it's out of sight hope but that's
that's about it and then the
slaughterhouses are everywhere they are
everywhere I remember on my blog I had
four maps of France and it was the the
with points of light showing you all the
slaughterhouses work but pretty much if
you have Google Maps doesn't always list
it but I was able with Google Maps to
just show there were slaughterhouses not
quite on every corner but every city in
France was surrounded by multiple
competing slaughterhouses
separation plants processing plants and
so on so it's everywhere so it is fresh
it is local it is decentralized
it is not relying on the seasons you
know etc so they have these unbelievable
economic advantages and fundamentally of
course the animals don't get paid a
salary Yeah right and once you talk
about these things that's so obvious but
it's not obvious because it's a living
being because they're creatures like you
think that's a cost it would be more
that for raising cattle raising chickens
than it would be for fruits and
vegetables that don't require you don't
require the same of course they they
aren't provided any care or attention
you know veterinary care is just trying
to get them to survive to being in ER we
were they each other if there's easy on
them in to feed dogs and cats you know
like that's that's really there are so
many things that are profitable about
the animal agriculture that I write so I
I want to get back to talking about your
experience and Laos because that was
really interesting to me when you were
talking to somebody and you talking to
government officials and you were trying
to say like please like you know like
trying to write them that you know this
is going to destroy your everyone your
this is going to destroy the ecology if
I know like you basically like I know
this will help you get out of poverty
but yeah it's fairly obvious that it's
going to destroy the ecosystem well
where I was I could point to that too I
mean so I was in villages we could say
look this village has one River the
river used to have
in it oh now it's got cows living on
both banks children can't swim in the
river anymore women can't wash the
clothes and the river was traditionally
they did you used to have a society or
made against it sounds histrionic it
sounds exaggerated sounds ridiculous to
say you know meat agriculture is going
to destroy the fabric of your society in
the case of country closets there was
really a lot of truth to that okay
the river and race agriculture used to
be a central this centre and organizing
principle of your whole society and in
becoming instead a society of cattle
ranchers I mean directly you are
destroying the river that everyone
relies on again not just drinking water
but bathing and and doing their doing
their laundry and so and killing and
eating fish which I'm against cuz I'm
vegan you know but this is the reality
these are all the things that they value
and you you could see that that there it
wasn't hidden away in a factory right
right so those are two things that I
have two things that I want to say so
one is I understand the motivation
behind like the vegans video when he's
talking about the actual costs
environmentally there was once it's just
like that you know it you paused the
video to say something and I was like
I'm confused with this because he was
saying you know however many billions of
dollars that it's costing that's the
real cost of me because of the
destruction of the environment and I'm
kind of like okay does this mean like
this amount of rainforest could produce
this amount of wood and that's look
that's what's more that's the that's the
cost of it I don't know like you said
that you would
and also like desert comes back to a
United Nations resolution that defined
and in report this publishes report that
defined the concept effect of ecological
sustainability and the definition they
favor it was debated over several
meetings of the UN was basically that
you had to have enough innovation
ongoing that the destruction of
ecological services would be replaced by
the innovation of new forms of service
provision so that actually said that
invented the
he's using here and that started people
doing calculations like okay so if you
start farming beef if you start raising
cattle for beef what is the dollar value
of destroying the river right yeah and
you can calculate it I mean it's a bit
surreal it's a bit ridiculous
you would actually know but you could
actually estimate well if we now have to
build a new sewage treatment plant or
new water processing facilities and
provide new ways of people doing their
laundry because people can't wash they
literally can't wash their clothes in
the river anymore can we come up with
with an abstract that here's the problem
why do you assume that these
calculations will always favor our cases
vegans this is that this is the
uncomfortable truth right we have an
ecological case or veganism we have an
ethical case or veganism we have a
health case or veganism but but guess
what economics it's sure economics is
not always on our side it's not and you
know I once I went toe to toe with one
cost which is continual cost of the
continual earnings of the same you
it's the same with damming a river if
somebody puts a dam in the river to
generate electricity and you say oh well
what if you do all the calculations for
all the knock-on effects guess what the
electricity may be worth more money yeah
it produces so many million dollars in
electricity it's worth more than all
this damages hey I went toe to toe a
little destroying the be prohibitive I
went toe to toe with Margaret on this
several times Margaret is Maude vegan as
another youtuber and she likes to she
likes to pretend that in all cases the
logic of market efficiency and economic
productivity is gonna favor the vegan
case and I gave her very simple counter
examples like lobsters no here's how you
farm lobsters you take a wooden cage
that's worth five cents you put bait in
it you throw it in the ocean you wait
you pull it out there's a lobster you
sell the lobster for twenty dollars or
someone it's a lot of money it's a lot
of money fast with very low labor and
the labourers don't need to have any
education
it's horrible exploitative and unethical
and bad for ecology I'm against it I'm
vegan but you really think you can make
an economic case for this no I mean I
was in Laos and I saw the stats I saw
the numbers where the United Nations and
other learning agencies were supporting
beef Agriculture's the number one fiber
out of poverty to stop farming rice
that's a really hard really inconvenient
truth and and and but the other imager
that startled this was when you see beef
available for only five dollars or
something in your in your rosary store
it's a really inconvenient truth to have
to accept Wow
you know what factory farming is
unbelievably efficient and when you go
through the ecological staff that backs
to the both of you you do nation by
nation comparisons of water footprint
water footprint means both how much
water was used up and how much waste is
produced right so how much pollution is
produced in Oklahoma Choiza and you say
wow modern Western industrialized
countries are way more efficient than
poorer winners
guess what factory farming it's a farm
with the efficiency of the factory it's
way more efficient so way more can
economically it's evil it's a point I'm
against it but you know let's let's face
up to we know what our enemy is here you
know what we're against here it's not
like smoking cigarettes which he also
contrasts to it's like oh well what if
you calculate the value of heart attacks
right right you know so I my other point
with with this topic specifically you've
talked you've had really good videos
about the production of palm oil and how
females can still be vegan if they
consume products that have sure palm oil
and part of that argument or part of
what you've said in about palm oil is
that there is going to be economic
development and it doesn't matter if
it's a palm oil crop it could be a
rubber tree crop there you can't stop
the progress of a society you can't stop
the progress of civilization basically
and but seeing it in a crude way but I
guess my question is how did you kind of
deal with that when you know that Laos
could be taken out of poverty you know
that
you know the quality of life could be
improved so much if culture were you
know okay so come back what was my
actual point about about rubber sorry
we're plantations or palm oil or any of
these other forms of plant a realtor or
another example is you know almonds
because a lot of the one of the
ecological impacts of almond farming in
California art or a tremendous and so on
my point isn't that there's going to be
progress anyway so tech clutch with
everything that's not my point my point
is whether you're looking at Indonesia
or Laos or California you have to be
honest about what is the alternative
you're comparing this to and this was
one of the major complaints I made about
like the vegans video I mean during it I
pause that I ranted that he was making
ludicrous comparisons he was comparing
real world situations to ludicrous finds
customs so are you in fact comparing the
scenario of a palm oil plantation to a
national park that exists to preserve
biodiversity now in some circumstances
that's a comparison worth making but
we're actually looking at in the
argument against palm oil is that people
are talking about palm well as if
somehow it will be a wonderful situation
for the orangutans if that same farm in
Indonesia stops farming palm oil and
instead farms rubber trees or coconuts
or sugar cane or strawberries or apples
all of those will equally eradicate the
habitat for the orangutans or any of
these animals so being honest that what
the alternative however you know my
point I've argued throughout have a
whole playlist of videos you know
national policy on wildlife habitat
biodiversity conservation areas and
national parks it is important
oh yes but let's not confuse the issue
by by you know pretending these are
these are one of the same thing yeah so
anyway would you want to direct me back
to what okay so you know you said that
in Laos they had traditionally been
reliant on opium and so there the
alternative that is being presented to
them is farming beef you know farming
Kevin
so in this same situation like what
would the alternative be beef and would
that be any better for the environment
and would that you know and it wouldn't
be as economically right no and and the
other thing here has to do with the the
time frame so you know I was with
government officials who were doing the
math on the proposal to farm tea green
tea so the same dhoti they they drink in
China they said well this proposal only
really becomes profitable after 300
years they were doing the economic
projections for 300 years in the future
another crop that the government had
favored in the past and given up on was
actually teak wood this is a type of
wood you make tables out of teak sorry
you know the first he could you're
watching this video um but that was
something like a 24 year horizon like
for the particular farmer before that
farmer would start making money it was a
belt of pods of 24 years and when they
did it was a huge it was a huge
experiment the government supporting
teak wood forming what they found was
that it massively exacerbated economic
inequality a small number of people
ended up getting rich and most of the
people almost the farms have fought for
and so so you know there are there are
advantages and disadvantages to every
mode and model effect so I could get
into the mechanics of why that is with
deep farming but for this video I think
it's not you know it's it's um you know
there were other people who were
supporting I knew a guy who was
supporting in a small pond
fish raising because they felt it was
more compatible with rights that you
could farm rice and then of a small pond
where they grow I think it was tilapia I
think it was but maybe it wasn't another
type of fish you could raise in a small
pond which is really more of a Chinese
tradition being exported to Laos you
know these kinds of changes so there
were a lot of people wringing their
hands and looking at the the situation
but you know yeah you can have a country
where farmers are mired in poverty but
here's the real point with opium the
experience in northern Thailand which is
very similar to Laos or the town's next
to it is basically once you start
building roads really good quality well
paved roads
that's when opium products
starts to disappear and partly because
that's when the open producers start to
have better options if if you have a
dirt road in the jungle OPM is your best
option you can imagine you can make a
flowchart diagram of supply chain
analysis what are all the factors you
need to be able to farm strawberries and
to get the strawberries to market while
they're still right and not Bruce never
get so it worth and that that all starts
with E peeved road connecting you to
civilization connecting the the producer
to the market so I mean obviously I've
already alluded to the fact that there
were all kinds of complexities here and
also governments have to be honest
themselves about what are the what are
the objectives of their social policy is
your objective to make the rich richer
to produce a you know yeah I don't think
the effect of cattle ranching in Texas
was to produce an egalitarian society a
small number of people in the history of
Texas got incredibly wealthy out of
Texas cattle rancher I mean over a
period of several centuries a small
number of people made use of a huge
amount of land with social and political
and economic and cultural consequences
that we all live with today
some people get rich from cattle
ranching and teak plantations or what
have you
none of these models of agriculture is
it kind of simple you know panacea for
um you know for social or ecological
problems but yeah I mean I think it is
interesting no I mean ultimately you
know if you're making arguments for
ethics they have to be ethical if you're
making arguments for ecology they have
to be ecological if you're making
arguments that are based on particular
social global raising the level of
education for the poor opportunities to
the poor or equality or some of this you
have to make those arguments in their
own terms and I think everyone likes to
lean on myths about economic efficiency
it's it's always basically what Mike the
vegan did in this video was he opens by
appealing to your sense of injustice
that when he says when you as a vegan go
to a grocery store you feel that beef
shouldn't be $5 when only five apples
are five dollars these are really
Canadian prices but it's true paying one
dollar for Apple is common again
so know you're a little bit better off
in Michigan to make Michigan produces
apples butts don't you think how can
these five apples be more expensive than
this beam but this is appealing to
magical thinking about economics
fundamentally on economic thinking so
well guess what whether it's beef or
chicken having the distributed network
of sheds keeping these animals get to be
year round not depend on the change of
season not dependent on fertile soil
which is scarce good weather conditions
which are unreliable not too much rain
too little rain could make a list of all
these factors which are is all this time
itself there is all the civilizations so
these and again that not dealing with
this this fundamental paradox that in
the like you know the one town that
produces strawberries or the one town
that produces oranges the strawberries
are worthless the orchards are worthless
and then having to ship them over a
network as far away as possible to get
to the place where the market moved for
us I knew a girl instead they even with
me
I think girl is from the the Pescador oh
I'm sorry that's the wrong hand what
chain she was from the remote as
pescadores are in Taiwan she was from
the remote islands of Portugal
I'm sorry Portugal has this chain of
islands that reach out towards Africa
yeah this is this chain I was gonna she
was from those islands and she said and
her family they were all fishermen there
and she said none of them eat fish all
the fish are sent to Japan because where
do you sell the fish you sell to the
highest price you can get in the world
market and that's literally the other
side of the world from from Portugal all
the best fish were sent to Japan and
they ate chicken why because on those
remote islands they had these horrible
steel and concrete sheds and we're
raising chicken in captivity and feeding
them you know chicken feed you know
chicken feed in English is used as a
slang term for something worthless yeah
you know and you can produce this meat
at this incredible profit locally
slaughtered etc etc the efficiency of it
is staggering the profitability is
horrifying so how do you make what did
you make the argument not to raise means
you know to do something else instead
well the parallel universe this is why I
mean there's a
another guy on YouTube called ask
yourself his real name is Isaac but he's
a deeply flawed character I'm a critic
of him in many ways but I really have
sympathy for what he's doing because he
tries to deal with the ethical arguments
as ethical he's aroused to take
seriously look if we're gonna talk about
veganism as meth karma it has to be
about ethics it can't be about you you
know there are all these other
extraneous factors that go on to get to
get drawn in that's a vegan that's how I
feel too but it's hard to convince
Meat Is Murder ripen whether the
argument is purely ethical or ecological
or health based let's really be honest
with ourselves about about what is if
slavery is more profitable which it is
does that mean you'll favor slavery or
allow some degree of slavers you know
does what does the profit motive justify
or not justify and your in your life
yeah you know for me the profit motive
could never justify drinking cow milk
instead of soy milk or eating cow ice
cream instead of soy ice cream to me
that that's that's madness right ya know
again you know you may live in a
situation we have to make a similar
decision you say okay this clothing was
produced by slavery and this clothing
wasn't they I think today slavery is
marginalized as such as that's you mean
I have the trip you do sometimes you do
and sometimes you have to make a choice
okay this product is made in Myanmar and
this product is made in Australia you
know is there an ethical reason why I'm
gonna refuse to buy something they don't
want place person other the conditions
of labor or what have you so em you know
there are limits to economic reasoning
and you know it's hard there are in to
be intrudes with the in veganism
there are inconvenient truths within
ecology and now you know I see a guy
like Mike the vegan and this is
basically of what he refuses to do he
refuses to be honest himself about these
things
yeah well we can we can end the video
here if you want but I had one other
thing to talk about because well I think
what's interesting to you about this
question is different than what's
interesting to me so you know
yeah sure so one of the statistics that
Mike the vegan talks about in his video
is about the actual cost of the waste
and you said that you would known about
this since since you were in high school
you're like oh sure this stuff is sure
the old news to me those fundamental
economic concepts were both part of my
becoming committed to ecology before I
became vegan and they're part of my
rejection of communism and socialism and
far-left politics and economics Jamie
we're going
now I'm fundamentally complement in a
way in economics that led me to other
considerations in life yeah sure I mean
the way that his videos are created is
to appeal to a mass audience I mean I
think that video will probably get many
thousands of views I mean this one
probably won't but I still think I have
a better beard I'm biased
um I think you're a better looking than
him so you know he mentions the way that
the argument is discussed is that
economic externalities right yeah when
you when you bring your garbage to the
curb to get picked up there's these
costs that are right that are externals
the companies right right and so there
so he was saying the real cost of meat
you have to factor in the cost of the
waste Oh even that phrasing is
interesting right but you have to factor
in the cost right no I mean the tragedy
we're all trying to deal with is that
reality is the exact opposite
no you're talking about like you
mentioned that like your deal with
ecological or Consequences story there
are many different it's just something
that we like you know he holds Samiha
industry to this different standard
recouping industry and I think what he's
being dishonest about is what is the the
comparison you're contrasting it to now
so he he sets you over this magical line
of reasoning that ok the meat industry
should be accountable for the cost of
reversing global
yes the industry should be accountable
for the cost of replacing the rancor
regrowing the rainbow 3 player was water
pollution in the Gulf of Mexico these
all three of these are in the videos
yeah so what are you actually
contrasting the meat industry to as an
alternative would it be reasonable or
convincing or politically actionable to
claim that the aircraft industry or a
specific aircraft company like American
Airlines you know that they have to pay
for the cost of the the ecological
damage done by people flying on
airplanes as opposed to everyone in the
world going from A to B getting global
transport by train through train
networks that don't even exist now you
know you do that calculation you'd
actually have to calculate all those you
can't just compare you know something
real to something ideal you have to
calculate the cost of building an
unfathomable amazing international
railroad network that actually made it
possible to get from New York to Paris
by train or something you know or you
know to get on get on the road Rome
which would have ecologic consequences
of course would have would have all
kinds of damage and all kinds of cost
but aside from that no it's it's
fundamentally a dishonest line of
reasoning no the airline company their
job is to transport people safely and
efficiently and at a good price between
two points and they are genuinely not
responsible for ecological and social
externalities of their business that
includes the destruction of the world's
upper atmosphere it's a real problem
I'm really concerned about earlier today
the same day I was looking at the latest
environmental policy from Taiwan the
happy democratic island of Taiwan Roga
Province of China the rest of China's
economy is dictatorship but not Taiwan
they put over 1 billion u.s. dollars
into a three-year program to
fundamentally improve air pollution and
includes a lot of the things other
countries don't want to do like forcing
bad cars and bad motorcycles to get off
the roads and to replace sources of
various air pollutants factories as well
as vehicles but to go through the whole
island and try to eliminate source
circle right
it's had an amazingly positive impact at
least on the northern part of Taiwan
which is the most population dance most
economically important part it has not
been as effective in the south where
they have a steel industry steel
smelters are still smelling steel
nevertheless this has been a big big
improvement in in just a couple of years
I was saying to Melissa look examples
like this are really important to
contrast to a sense of resignation ISM
fatalism you know that people can't
Bosman you know in a short period of
time with a large budget but a finite
budget here's a small country that made
a huge improvement in its air quality in
air pollution you know situation now did
it accomplish this through this kind of
you know circular and I think circular
reasoning
I think dishonest reasoning that you
know Mike the begin is engaged in no I
mean you know poor people buy the best
car they can part of the problem in
Taiwan is cars being on the roads that
are twenty years old who buys 20 year
old vehicles you know poor people
okay well buying a second vehicle we're
still using a car more than 20 years old
I think I know someone someone in this
room I think you know it's it's not it's
not the rich what are you gonna do go to
those people and say you you are
accountable for the economic
externalities of your of your of your
decision you know they're it's a mode of
reasoning I understand why people want
to think that way but it is actually you
know I think profoundly misleading and
profoundly wrong you know I mean you
know the tragedy we all deal with is
exactly that you can run a leather
tannery you leather or factory and you
never pay for the pollution that you put
into the river that is the reality of
the world we we live in now obviously
this difference being a descriptive
statement of fact and uh you know moral
a description of what ought to be and
laws like those that have just come
around in Taiwan I think since 2017 um
you know they can change the world
changes in look another thing I said
what we're watching like the vegan video
I said that even aesthetic and artistic
arguments would be more convinced
to me than what's being advanced here as
an economic argument I mean all sorry
you guys know this even watching my
channel
ultimately the decision to quit smoking
is not going to be economic all right
ultimately this question of what kind of
a person do I want to be what kind of a
society we want to have certain come
back to question but Laos and we got
sidetracked as I said look I respect
people like ask yourself you know for
what he does because he really treats
the ethical questions as ethical you
know let's let's deal with these things
in a rigorous catechol categorized way
um you know I'm having to ask people and
wow this is these are real conversations
I had face to face with with communist
government officials do you want to live
in a society with zero Tigers I was in a
village where they had just killed the
last two Tigers there was a mated pair
one male one female they killed them and
they sold their their remains to Chinese
people that sold the corpses to Chinese
people who probably turned it into a rug
and you know I asked him the historical
name for Laos was LAN Xang which is the
land of 10,000 elephants hundred
thousand elephants but it's a number
it's like an English we would say a
million elephants it was the land of
plentiful elephants um I said look in
the past you were the land of a million
elephants how many wild elephants are
there today
how many wild elephants they're gonna be
ten years from now 20 years from now
your children or grandchildren do you
want them to be in a country with zero
elephants and zero tigers in a million
motorcycles I made a joke about that so
this in the future this into the land of
a million motorcycles and a million
cellular phones and zero elephants and I
really look at the I got a big laugh out
of people with that I'm a lot lotion is
one of the few languages I got to be
funny and I spoke the language one wants
to really make some good chucks and I
don't do that so much in Chinese these
days and maybe they just appreciate it
my humor more over there I don't know um
that I was really challenged what you
know what kind of a person you want to
be what kind of society you want do you
want to have a society that preserves
rice agriculture and again Laos is
traditionally a terrible a Buddhist
country a country that's morally opposed
to eating large mammals especially cows
or do you want to become a country
that's a second-rate you know import
segregate imitation of American culture
American cattle farming that gets rid of
these Buddhist virtues in this whole
fabric of society built around rice
farming it's on what do you want to do
and just in asking those questions you
know you could be doing something
important say look this is the
transformation goes there but I do but
the answers are not economic and that's
the tragedy of it all the answer is not
gonna be oh well just look at the bottom
line which is what mod vegan wants to do
and won't make the beginning at least in
this particular video wants to do know
if it's about money now it's about money
on the table right well and it's a great
argument to me and it's convincing to me
but I grew up in the Western world where
I am you know the world that I was that
I grew up and was built on deforestation
was built on genocide was built on all
of these you know you know and you
mentioned no more elephants no right you
know do you want to live in a world with
no more Tigers well there are many and
in the United States there are so many
species that have gone extinct and you
know they're basically event-driven
there's one island in Canada that still
has Buffalo the actual the it's an
island within a river by the way that's
one of the coast
yeah the Buffalo is gone extinct
basically all of our natural ecology and
natural species the exception of arctic
animals like polar bears yeah it's it's
greener kind of argument in that like
you know I would think yes we did live
in a world where there are still Tigers
roaming there are still elements roaming
look then I wouldn't have the
conveniences of the Internet I don't
read other way so maybe this is a
positive note in a video on if you look
at a country like Japan and these is
true of most of Europe and a lot of
Canada the United States to you you get
a pattern now Japan becoming a mature
economy where the countryside empties
out a larger and larger percentage the
population is concentrated in just the
biggest cities Tokyo Osaka whatever you
have a lot of empty space so it's it's
paradoxical but Japan is more
overpopulated than ever it also has more
space than ever just today we took a
1000 kilometer or train ride very
approximately which is a very very long
trade right across France and I was
googling it through a huge empty area
unbelievable amperes Wow and I mean
empty this is in the in the in the
middle of France you know you're
googling it and getting the population
statistics and checking wasn't just what
I was seeing at the window there are
vast uninhabited areas of France and
they have ghost towns the population is
declining yes Canada just just look up
population density Canada man Google
that Canada has huge empty areas even on
the west coast you know etc etc America
too right so actually in the 21st
century we have the potential that
societies like Japan where everyone has
access to the Internet and modern
technology and where people live
together in cities and we actually have
I think more potential than ever to
devote a significant percentage of our
land to wildlife habitat you know and I
said that is the ultimate contrast you
know it's not using this kind of United
Nations technical terminology like
ecological services this you know no
it's committing to drawing lines in the
map and saying okay this land doesn't
exist for economic exploitation by
anyone not for tourism not for hunting
not for meat production and also not for
palm oil production or almond production
or you know any vegan food production
either is how much we're committing that
exists where the wilderness exists for
the sake of the wilderness kind of full
stop period and I think that the
potential for that is greater than ever
before and you know the economic
survival of our society has become
detached from the land more than ever
before and we did have new stats I think
I posted them to my patreon group that
were new estimates done for how
radically we can reduce our reliance on
land
how much less land we if the whole
world's population becomes vegan and the
researcher who did the math they were
very long indeed
calculations the estimates had been done
before but this guy went through all the
math root and branch you know and came
to new you know you know new numbers and
more thoroughly than ever done before he
became vegan in the process of doing the
the equation in the process of their
doing doing the calculations which again
I think is interesting it's someone who
cares about ecology coming to the
rational conclusion look you know if I
if I'm gonna live by the tenets of my
own knowledge not even believe yes the
facts I'm aware of this is this is an
inevitable application so we need less
land than ever before and veganism is
part of that fewer and fewer people as a
percentage of population fewer and fewer
people are employed hewing the land you
know by felling trees and farming and so
on and in some ways that's a that's a
that's tragic and it's a challenge to
our society
believe me Japan's example that you may
think of yourself as a country built on
agriculture and rice farming and
forestry and hunting and that's not the
reality of who you are in the 21st
century that's changed forever
but there's something really wonderful
and that there's a there's the potential
there as we become more gathered around
hubs of potential employment in in the
big cities of the world that it opens up
more more than map to do the most
fundamentally moral thing of all which
for me is not veganism believe me I
spend all my time preaching veganism but
still it's actually it's actually
wildlife you know management wildlife
preservation conservation of of the wild
for the sake of the world and that's
what we need I think it's an
international foundation that's based on
pushing countries including third world
countries like Laos to commit a
significant percentage of their land
mass not for human use and exploitation
but for the animals themselves any less
worth babe no I thought that was really
great